# Phase I: Analyzing Users, Competitors, and Initial Designs

## Introduction

Golf is a sport that has stood the test of time, but it seems time is now testing golf. Golf is steeped in tradition, old values and old school methods of bringing games and people together. Golf has always been behind with the times, for example, it took 8 years after the first football game was televised for the first Open to be televised. In the modern era, personal devices run the world and just like TV, golf is behind the curve when it comes to media applications. Tee-Together seeks to attack the curve by being a free one-stop shop for bringing golfers together and sharing information on PGA and local events all around America. 

## Methods

In order to better understand the market we intend to enter, and identify potential selling points unique to Tee-Together, we compared the features of three other social golf apps (Deemples Golf, Tee Up, and Hole19) via competitive analysis. We also performed a heuristic evaluation of our most established competitor Hole19, in which the app was rated on a scale from 1 to 10 for its adherence to several tenets of UX design. This was done for the purpose of exposing potential design improvements/pitfalls in our competition, as well as putting us in the mindset to evaluate the user experience we are creating for Tee-Together. In order to have a visual reference for our app concept, we sketched the rough layout for multiple possible states of our app. Three personas, each with their own unique goals and scenarios, were also created to establish potential user goals that our app could satisfy. 

## Findings

Despite implementing very similar concepts, two of the applications we analyzed were not significant direct competitors. Deemples Golf satisfies many of our MVP and post-MVP user goals with a clean user-friendly implementation, but the app lacks a broader social functionality and its course selection is limited to golf courses in Southeast Asia. Tee Up offers a much simpler interface and seems much closer to matching our user goals, but focuses dominantly on skill-based matchmaking. As a result, the app seems to have been abandoned by its developers due to a lack of users.
	The app which most directly and significantly challenges ours is Hole19. The app scored highly on most sections of our heuristic evaluation (average of around 8/10 points per section). The majority of points deducted during the heuristic analysis were a product of the app’s generic aesthetic and its crowded arrangement of paywalled features. In addition, our competitive analysis showed that Hole19 contains all of the features necessary to fulfill our own user goals, as well as some other technically-impressive features with niche use cases, such as smartwatch compatibility and AR shot tracking. Despite all of this, scorecards can only be created in Hole19 by selecting the course in their Courses selection. While California’s golf courses are well-documented, this may limit the scope of the scorecard functionality tremendously in other areas of the world.
The sketches we created for the app layout are more akin to wireframes in terms of their fidelity compared to the imagined final product. Much of the app’s interface is easily translated to paper since it follows well-established social media standards and uses commonly-accepted icons and symbols. At the expense of making the app less unique, these standards make the app far more accessible to new users. Much of the app identity will come from its aesthetics, though the app still establishes its own identity with a few non-standard layout gimmicks: the Radial Navigation Bar and Screen-Specific Settings Symbols. While inactive, The Radial Navigation bar exists as a circular button with a flag icon at the bottom of the screen. Upon clicking the button, buttons linking to each of the app’s main screens (Courses, Scorecards, etc.) are displayed with relevant iconography in a semi-circle around the main flag button. Since this concept is not a common standard, it is less recognizable than a standard navbar; still, it is recognizable enough that a simple explanation should suffice when a user first installs the app. Screen-Specific Settings Symbols involves splitting up the settings by screen (i.e. User Profile screen contains only User Profile settings), and using specific setting symbols for each page. Each symbol takes the form of a gear icon with the page’s symbol imposed on top of it.
When creating our personas and scenarios, we learned that it is important for course accessibility information to be readily available. We learned this through Clint Wedge, a retired veteran who lost a leg and whose most important consideration is that the course is accessible to him. We learned the importance of community-driven events through Barret Green’s scenario. He wanted to play golf with people but all his current friends do not play golf. So, through the app he found an event at a local course where he can play with golfers of a similar skill level. We learned the importance of locating local courses through Darryl Wood’s scenario, where he wanted to play a game of golf with his daughter and needed to find a local course to play at. 

## Conclusions

Through our limited user feedback and the artifacts we created, the main conclusions that can be taken away is that the app needs to be streamlined and have greater functionality. That we need to make it as easy and effortless as possible to interact and use this application. Going forward we will keep working on the scorecard adding new features into it, such as the ability to change the amount of holes you can set to play for a round. We will also add more course information and the ability to use your location to find local courses around you. The final goal going forward will be working towards minimizing the number of steps that need to be taken to complete any important action.

## Caveats
We were unable to properly evaluate Hole19 on the basis of error prevention/recognition/recovery. This is because we did not encounter any user errors in our time experimenting with Hole19. One potential source of “error” is that a free-tier user can select any of the many premium features they cannot use, which brings up an advertisement for the app’s premium subscription. This interaction is certainly intended by the developers, however, so we strain to call it a user error.
In addition, besides a few snippets of feedback from software engineer students, we currently have absolutely no user data to work with. Finding this user data may be difficult going forward. Since the app’s target demographic must be invested enough in golf to get an app for it, they may also be experienced enough with golf to prefer—or at least know well enough to ignore—the additional features of Hole19 a completely casual player would not need. We are also novices to the field of UX, so it is possible we have misguided findings and conclusions.

